Java Fundamental Course. Exercise:
HelloWorld with Java and NetBeans
Exercise Objective: In this first
exercise we're going to create our first
Java program using NetBeans. At the end
we should see the next result
methodology of the exercises. Every
exercise has been made a step by step so
the only thing you have to do is to
follow every step and as you continue
with the course you'll be more familiar
with our new methodology called a Speed
Learning, so you can study from the video
or right in the PDF or eBook file
because you have all the instructions
step-by-step in both: the videos or the
PDF files (ebooks). We hope you enjoy our
methodology we are sure you will save
tons of hours of studying once you get
familiarized with our speed learning
methodology. Let's start with this
exercise. Create a new project. We'll
create a new project called
HelloWorld project. So, we open NetBeans
click on file and click on New Project
We select the Java category and Java
Application. As we see the steps. Step 1:
We select the Java category. Step 2:
Select the projects Java Application and
Third: we click on Next. The first time a
java project is created NetBeans
activates this kind of project so we
wait to finish it to activate it. We
assign a name and a path for our new
project, as shown below. Project Name
HelloWorld. Project Location we assign a directory or a
path in this case is called c:\Courses\JavaFundamentals\Lesson01 As a third
step, we deselect the Create Main Class.
We'll see later what the main class is
but in this case we want to create the
main class by ourselves and finally
click on Finish
This is the result of creating a new
project in NetBeans. The source package
folder is where our Java code will live
We don't have any Java class yet but we
will create a Java class in the next
step
Create a Java class. We will create a new
Java class. A class is a new file with
the same name in the source code and in
the name of the file. The file must end
with the .java extension. So let's create a
new class. Right click on the project
name, select New and select Java class. We
assign the name: SayHello to our new
class and click on Finish. So the class
name is SayHello, the package is empty a
package is like a folder. We'll see this
topic in other lesson. As you can see the
extension is added automatically and
finally click on Finish. The new class
must look like shown below. By now a new
class must have the public modifier the
class keyword and the name of the class
in this case the name is SayHello and
the code of the class must be inside the
brackets. By now a new class must have
the public modifier the class keyword
and the name of the class in this case
SayHello and the code of the class must
be inside the brackets. The extension
.java is added automatically to the file
The next step is to modify our Java Code
of the SayHello class. It's important to
tell you that every exercise has an eBook associated and you can download it
and check the source code of every file
this is part of our Speed Learning
methodology. You can always check the
complete source code of every file in
every exercise. If you have problems
coding any exercise, you can click on
the name of the file or class that is
given to you or you can download the
complete project that is 100% functional
Let's see how the SayHello class is
implemented
This is the code for the SayHello.java
class. First we write public. This is
an access modifier, after that we write
class, indicating that this is a java
class and finally the name of the class
in this case SayHello. We open a bracket
and we can write in this case a main
method. We'll talk about this main method
later, but the main method is needed to
execute or Java class. After that, we
write to the console "Say Hello". You can
send any text to the console. In this
case we are sending the string "Say Hello"
We close the main method and close the
class SayHello. Let's explain the main
method. As we can see, after the
definition of the class, we have created
a main method. This method is necessary
to execute the class SayHello. To define
a main method that is executable, we
need to write the code below. public is a
modifier, we'll see the access modifier
later in the course. A static is a
modifier, we'll see the static modifier
later in the course. void this means the
method returns nothing, we'll see this
reserved word later in the course. main
this is the name of the method and must
be in lowercase letter, and the
parameters. In this case the parameter is
called "args" and is an array of strings
This is the parameter of the method and
it's an array of a string types. We'll
see String types and Arrays later in the
course, and the body of the main method
any line inside the (curly) brackets of the main
method is the body of the method. Inside
the body of the method there is a System.out.println method. Inside the
body of the main method there is a
System.out.println method. The
println method prints to the console the
text or string that we pass as a
parameter to this method. The important
part of this exercise is to execute our
first Java program. So, it's not important
to understand everything
at this moment, what is important to
understand is the process of creating
and executing a project in Java. Executed
project. Finally we execute our project
Right-click on the SayHello class and
select "Run File". This is the result of
executing our code. As we can see the
output says "Say Hello". Is the same text
is the same string that we pass as an
argument to the function println. With
this exercise we have created our first
Java program with the help of the
NetBeans IDE. An IDE (integrated
Development Environment) is a tool that
will help us to a speed our creation of
software with Java, however we should not
depend 100% on this type of tools, since
in a job many times we will not be able
to select the IDE and therefore we can
stay without any knowledge when changing
the IDE. For this reason we will learn the
concepts, which can be applied in any IDE
regardless of which one we use or that
of our preference. For this, we will
provide all the fully functional code in
any IDE and so, you can use any IDE of
your choice. Finally, we know many of the
concepts are new to many programmers but
believe us, we've structured the course
in a way that every lesson has a
specific topic and nothing more than
that, in order to retain the concept or
be able to review a concept during the
course. So please be patient when studing
this course, and if you plan to be a good
programmer this is a necessary skill so
again please be PATIENT. You'll be an
excellent Java programmer at the end of
this course.